So for our final example before we really
get into the course, let us look at a problem
involving documents. So, we have two documents
and our goal is to find out how similar they
are, right. So, are these two documents really
variations of the same thing. Now, there may
be many different scenarios where this problem
is interesting. So, one question may be for
plagiarism detection. So, it could be that
somebody has posted an article in a newspaper
or on a website and you believe that this
author has not really written the article
themselves. They have copied this article
from somewhere else or if you are a teacher
in a course, you might be worried that the
student, two students have submitted the same
assignments or one student has copied an assignment
from some source on the Internet. So, by looking
at how similar, if you can measure how similar
two documents are, you can try to quantify
this notion that somebody has copied from
somebody else.
Now, it may not always have a negative connotation
like this. It might also be to look at some
kind of things when some people are writing
code typically writing programs for some application,
over a period of time documents evolve in
the sense the program evolves, right. So,
people add features. Now, you might want to
look at two different pieces of code and try
to figure out what are the changes that had
happened. How similar they are, how different
they are, what the actual changes that have
happened.
Another place where there is positive notion
towards documents similarity is to look for
web search. If you ask a question to a search
engine and it reports results, typically it
tries to group together results which are
similar because they are not really different
answers. Now, if there are 10 different copies
or similar copies of a document saying more
or less the same thing and these show up as
your first 10 search results, then another
document will be highly relevant and quite
different from these will now be lost because
it will be off the first page of searches.
So, it is useful to be able to group together
the results of a search query by similarity,
so that the user is actually presented by
an effective choice between different answers
to the search query and not just a large number
of variations of the same answer.
So, if this is our motivation, we need a way
of comparing documents what is a good measure
of similarity of documents. Now, there are
many different notions that people have come
up with. Obviously, it has to do something
with the order of the words and the choice
of letters and so on, but one way of quantifying
the distance between two documents is to use
what is called the edit distance, namely how
many changes do you have to make to transform
one document into another document, and by
edit we mean supposing you actually loaded
the document in a text editor or word processor,
what would be the kind of things that you
could do where we could limit because you
could of course block out and delete the entire
document and then cut and paste another document
and say I did it in two steps, but this could
be kind of cheating. So, we have to limit
what operations you do, so that we have a
uniform way of counting this. So, we could
say that edit involves how many characters
you are changing. So, each step of editing
will either add or remove a letter and perhaps
we can allow you to replace one letter by
another letter and call that one change. So,
now we want to count these as our basic steps
adding or removing a letter or replacing one
letter by another, and find out how many steps
it takes to edit one document to make it into
another document.
So, the minimum number of edit operations
will then determine the distance. Now, the
question that we have as an algorithm problem
is how to compute this minimum distance, right.
How do you decide what is the best way to
edit one document and make it another document.
Of course, there is always a trivial solution
like that block cut and block paste. You can
just delete all the letters and then type
in the new documents. So, there is a brute
force way of doing it, but this is not likely
to be the best possible way, right. So, you
can also try out all possible delete and insert
sequences and see which among them gives you
the best solution, but all of these are very
inefficient kind of solutions.
So, again we can go to this question of decomposing
the problem. So, supposing our first goal
is to just make the first character of the
two documents same, if they are already the
same, we leave and go on. If they are not
the same, well then we have two options, right.
We can either transform the character, the
first character to be equal or we can insert
a character in one of the two documents. So,
supposing the document, first document starts
with an x and the second document starts with
a z. Either we can say we do one operation
to make x into z or z into x or we can insert
an x before the z or insert a z before the
x or we can delete the x, but then we do not
necessarily get the same answer. Then, once
we have done this, once we have made the first
character the same, then we can recursively
try to fix the rest of the document.
So, now one of the difficulties we face when
we do recursion in this manner is that the
same sub-problem becomes up for solution many
times. So, a typical example of this is the
recursive solution to finding the nth Fibonacci
number. So, the Fibonacci numbers are defined,
it is a very classical sequence. So, the first
two Fibonacci numbers are 1 and 1. After this
you get the next Fibonacci number adding the
previous two. So, after 1 and 1, the next
one is 2 which is 1 plus 1. The next one is
3 which is 1 plus 2 and so on. 5 is 2 plus
3 and so on. So, in general the recursive
relationship is given by the fact that f n
is the sum of the previous two numbers, n
minus 1 n minus 2, and then you have as a
base case that the first two numbers f 1 and
f 2 for which n minus 1 and n minus 2 may
not be defined for these two numbers, the
value is 1.
Now, the problem is that when you apply the
recursion directly, so if you try to compute
the seventh Fibonacci number for example,
it will say for this I need to compute f 6
plus f 5, but if I then recursively apply
this to f 6 and f 5, we find things like f
4 coming up twice. So, we have an f 4 which
comes here and an f 4 which comes here because
when I do f 5, I need to apply this recurrence,
and when I do f 6, I need to apply this recurrence.
So, If I naively do it, I compute f 4 twice
and in fact, when I compute this f 5, I actually
get another f 4. I am computing f 4 a number
of times, f 3 a number of times and so on.
So, this is really an inefficient way to calculate
it whereas, if I just do it for instance here,
I get 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 and I find that the
seventh Fibonacci number is actually in the
sequence is 13, right. So, there is intuitively
a very fast way to do this. The recurrence
is respected, but if I do it recursively,
I end up solving a lot of problems again and
again. So, how do we get around it and this
is what we call dynamic program.
So, dynamic programming says do not compute
same sub-problems twice. Whenever we have
solved a problem, if have found f of 4, just
look it up, store it somewhere, look it up
and make sure that you do not do f 4 again.
So, this is one of the techniques that we
have seen in beginning as that we are going
to do in this course, and it is important
that when we break-up problems into sub-problems,
it is not always the case that the sub problems
can be solved efficiently unless we look slightly
more deeply into the structure of sub-problems
and make sure we solve them in an effective
sequence.
Now, as usual this problem of the difference
or similarity between two documents can be
at many different levels. So, we are focused
on the words, the actual text, but if we do
not really look at the sequence of words,
we just want a set of words, then they might
be far apart in terms of edit distance because
we need to rearrange the words, but the content
if we just measure in terms of what types
of words are there, this might give us an
accurate understanding of the meaning of the
documents. So, if you actually search for
a document in a typical search engine, you
will often find that the words that you ask
for may not occur together, may not occur
in the sequence that you mention. It will
just find documents which have that collection
of words. So, this is very useful for web
search and the other thing that you might
want to do is, measure similarity of words
in terms of meaning.
So, if you search for a document which contains
the word car and there is another document
which contains the word automobile, it might
to be a good idea for the search engine to
report the documents containing automobile,
because automobile and car are essentially
the same thing. So, like the other example
you have seen before, there can be variations
on the problem and the solution that you have
for the original problem, may or may not be
valid for these variations. So, there is always
a whole space of new and interesting problem
to solve in all these things.